---
title: "KNIFE - Home"
layout: homelay
excerpt: "Knowledge Discovery from Health Use Data"
sitemap: false
permalink: /
---

The increasing use and capability of Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems has made available large databases of patient records, linked across different health providers. These databases contain information about patients’ use of the different health services, treatments and prescriptions. The data, collected for clinical management or financial reporting, has many actual and potential uses including discovering causes, optimising health delivery, allocating resources and choosing treatment. However, there are both practical and technical challenges to overcome before these benefits can be achieved. 

The overall objective of the project is to lay the foundations for a transformative approach to patientlinked health data, making it accessible for both medical and data science researchers to fully exploit. We will achieve this by working with two groups who are custodians of data of this type in East London The data is both large and complex covering over a million patientsin East London. 

The data is relational, with multiple entities (e.g. patient, disease, clinical service). This is immediately a challenge given that familiar statistical techniques assume ‘flat’ data (or hierarchical clustering). Moreover, the entities are individually complex and variable (e.g. different data for different patients). Time is important: some diseases are resolved in a single episode, perhaps involving multiple interactions with the health system, but many others are chronic, with time characteristics (e.g. time to diagnosis, frequency of admission to hospital) of potential interest to health researchers. From these characteristics, we identify the areas of challenge that this data presents.

*Challenge of Understanding the Data and It Potential Use.* The data arise from the operation of the health services, so the understanding of the data contents is embedded in the health community and not accessible to the wider AI and ML communities. Although the data are held in relational databases, we hypothesise that the relational schema only captures semantic relationships to a limited extent. For example, a typical EHR uses a hierarchy of forms: common data at the top with a choice of lower-level forms to enter the data considered relevant. As a result, considered just as attributes of a patient, much of the possible data will be absent though not actually ‘missing’. In a similar way, the understanding of the potential uses of the data is also well known to the health community but not mapped to the machine learning or statistical techniques needed.

*Challenge of Knowledge Elicitation and Modelling.* Achieving the full potential from the data requires knowledge of health care processes. Aspects of this may need to be modelled as part of the data analysis: for example, analysing the effect of possible changes in medical practice requires causal models and causal relationships cannot be distinguished from data. It is understood how to build causal models at a smaller scale but it is a new challenge to build knowledge-based models capable of working with data of this size and complexity. Additional benefits of a knowledge-based approach include examples such as: a) the accuracy of the data likely relates to how it was recorded – at the time of consultation or separately; b) medical care evolve over time (e.g. new guidelines are introduced) which will create systematic changes in the data; c) information (e.g. interventions and outcomes) may be latent, needing to be inferred.

*Statistical Modelling Challenge.* Existing approaches to analysis of this data [e.g. 1, 2] often use conventional statistical techniques by extracting a ‘flat’ dataset from the relational database, relevant to the problem of interest. This approach remains relevant. However, advances in Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) [surveyed in 3, 4] offer the potential to move beyond ‘conventional’ models, but with challenges of both scale and applicability: which of the wide range of potentially applicable models would answer the questions of interest? For example, much emphasis in the literature is on predicting the existence of links between entities, but it is unclear how important this is for EHR data.


*Challenge of Efficient and Acceptable Data Handling.* Existing studies using data from EHR systems, require extensive ‘data wrangling’ to extract and cleanse a usable dataset. This work is largely manual and very time consuming. Challenges include finding relevant data, coding data and missing data but also the more conceptually straightforward process of repeatedly writing, running and checking queries. Acceptable ways to host the data, especially if more complex ML techniques are to be used, is also a challenge. Although QMUL SMD has access to computing resources with appropriate security (e.g. the recent HDR award), the information governance issues are not straightforward. 

These challenges distinguish this data from the most common examples used in large-scale data mining. Some applications of relational machine learning (e.g. social networks) are primarily concerned with a single entity or are familiar within the CS domain (e.g. authorship and citation of papers, web pages). Work on medical data is inter-disciplinary, and it is challenging to to bring together the relevant research communities, establishing both communication and trust.

References
1. Robson J., Dostal I., Madurasinghe V., Sheikh A., Hull S., Boomla K., Griffiths C., and Eldridge S. NHS Health Check comorbidity and management: An observational matched study in primary care. British Journal of General Practice (2017) 67(655) e86-e93
2. Homer K, Boomla K, Hull S, Dostal I, Mathur R, Robson J. “Statin prescribing for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a cross-sectional, observational study”. The British Journal of General Practice. 2015;65(637):e538-e544. doi:10.3399/bjgp15X686113.
3. M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp and E. Gabrilovich, “A Review of Relational Machine Learning for Knowledge Graphs”, in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 11-33, Jan. 2016. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2483592
4. Sun, Yizhou and Jiawei Han. “Mining heterogeneous information networks: a structural analysis approach”. SIGKDD Explorations 14 (2012): 20-28.
